Remove Matter from sdk-nrf (#30253)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/releases_and_maturity/migration/migration_ncs_matter.rst

* Shared Matter sample infrastructure (formerly under :file:`nrf/samples/matter/common`, now under :file:`ncs-matter/subsys`)
* Matter partition devicetree include files (formerly under :file:`nrf/dts/samples/matter`, now under :file:`ncs-matter/dts`)
* Matter build and data-model CMake helpers (formerly under :file:`nrf/samples/matter/common/cmake`, now under :file:`ncs-matter/cmake`)
* Matter-specific Zephyr snippets (formerly under :file:`nrf/snippets/matter`, now under :file:`ncs-matter/snippets`)

The add-on manifest (:file:`ncs-matter/west.yml`) imports a fixed |NCS| release together with the matching ``sdk-connectedhomeip`` revision.

Setting up the workspace
************************

To work with Matter samples and applications from the add-on, set up a west workspace that includes the ``ncs-matter`` repository.

Initialize from the add-on manifest
===================================

Complete the following steps to create a new workspace with the `Matter Add-on`_ as the manifest repository:

.. parsed-literal::

   west init -m https://github.com/nrfconnect/ncs-matter --mr |release|
   cd ncs-matter
   west update

> Replace |release| with the add-on release tag that matches your target |NCS| version (see the add-on release notes).

Reviewer: |release| is a shortcut that resolves to current NCS version in the output. Add-ons usually follow different versioning than NCS so I'm assuming there will be no '3.4.0' tag in the Matter add-on repo for a long time.

<img width="712" height="152" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/57b3737e-a8f7-4519-a652-9df96d21a8fa" />

Use sharp brackets here -> ``<release>``

Removed Kconfig options
=======================

The following options from :file:`nrf/samples/matter/common/src/Kconfig` are no longer available in the add-on:

* ``CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_ZAP_GENERATION_STATIC``
* ``CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_ZAP_GENERATION_BUILD_TIME``

The add-on uses pre-generated ZAP output checked into each sample's :file:`src/default_zap/zap-generated/` directory.
Regenerate ZAP files using the Matter west commands documented in the add-on tooling section.

Sysbuild configuration
======================

Matter samples in the add-on use a :file:`sysbuild_internal.conf` file at the sample root to hold sysbuild image options that were previously embedded in sample-specific sysbuild configuration.
If your custom project relied on the same sysbuild defaults (for example, MCUboot overwrite-only mode with compressed image support), copy the relevant options from the corresponding add-on sample's :file:`sysbuild_internal.conf` file.

The add-on sysbuild Kconfig (:file:`ncs-matter/sysbuild/Kconfig.sysbuild`) disables the :ref:`partition_manager` globally for Matter builds, consistent with the devicetree-based partitioning introduced in |NCS| v3.4.0.

> See also ``matter_migration_3.4`` for partition migration details that still apply after moving to the add-on.

Reviewer: Why not just use ``:ref:`` here? It should link without a problem.

```suggestion
See also :ref:`matter_migration_3.4` for partition migration details that still apply after moving to the add-on.
```

Documentation and tooling
***************************

Documentation
=============

Matter sample documentation, getting started guides, and protocol documentation that previously lived under :file:`nrf/doc/nrf/protocols/matter/` and :file:`nrf/doc/nrf/samples/matter.rst` are published from the ``ncs-matter`` add-on documentation set.
After migrating your project, use the add-on documentation as the primary reference for building, configuring, and testing Matter samples.

The |NCS| documentation retains high-level Matter integration information and links to the add-on, similar to how :ref:`zigbee_samples` references the Zigbee add-on repositories.

.. note::
   Documentation cross-references that use the ``|sample path|`` substitution now point to paths under :file:`ncs-matter/samples/` instead of :file:`nrf/samples/matter/`.
   Update any custom documentation or internal wikis that hard-code the old paths.

Validation scripts
==================

If you use the Matter sample validation tooling locally, switch to the add-on copy under :file:`ncs-matter/scripts/matter_sample_checker/`.

> The checker configuration expects add-on directory layout (for example, a partition includes without the ``samples/matter/`` prefix and snippet paths under :file:`ncs-matter/snippets/`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The checker configuration expects the add-on directory layout — for example, partition #include directives without the samples/matter/ prefix, and snippet paths under :file:`ncs-matter/snippets/`.
```

When working in an add-on workspace, make sure your ``ZAP_INSTALL_PATH`` environment variable is set and run west commands from the workspace root that contains both ``ncs-matter`` and ``modules/lib/matter``.

What remains in sdk-nrf
***********************

The following Matter-related components stay in the core |NCS| (``sdk-nrf`` and imported modules):

* The Connected Home IP stack itself (:file:`modules/lib/matter`, imported through ``sdk-nrf``)
* Matter Kconfig and GN integration under :file:`modules/lib/matter/config/nrfconnect/`
* Shared |NCS| infrastructure used by Matter (OpenThread, MCUboot integration, IPC radio, factory data generation in ``sdk-nrf``)
* Core |NCS| documentation links and software maturity information for Matter platform features

Only the Matter reference samples, their shared sample code, snippets, and partition devicetree assets move to ``ncs-matter``.

Migration checklist
*******************

Use this checklist when migrating a custom Matter application:

#. Set up a west workspace that includes the ``ncs-matter`` add-on at a release matching your target |NCS| version.

> #. Move or copy your application sources to a path under your workspace (or use an add-on sample as the new base).
> #. Update :file:`CMakeLists.txt`:
>    * Include :file:`ncs-matter/cmake/sample.cmake` instead of the former ``samples/matter/common/cmake/*`` files.
>    * Replace ``ZEPHYR_NRF_MODULE_DIR`` Matter paths with ``ZEPHYR_NCS_MATTER_MODULE_DIR``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Update :file:`CMakeLists.txt`:

   * Include :file:`ncs-matter/cmake/sample.cmake` instead of the former ``samples/matter/common/cmake/*`` files.
   * Replace ``ZEPHYR_NRF_MODULE_DIR`` Matter paths with ``ZEPHYR_NCS_MATTER_MODULE_DIR``.
```

.. _migration_sdk_nrf_to_ncs_matter:

Migrating Matter projects from sdk-nrf to ncs-matter

> ####################################################

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Migrating Matter projects from sdk-nrf to Matter add-on
#######################################################
```
To avoid the term ncs.

* Shared Matter sample infrastructure (formerly under :file:`nrf/samples/matter/common`, now under :file:`ncs-matter/subsys`)
* Matter partition devicetree include files (formerly under :file:`nrf/dts/samples/matter`, now under :file:`ncs-matter/dts`)
* Matter build and data-model CMake helpers (formerly under :file:`nrf/samples/matter/common/cmake`, now under :file:`ncs-matter/cmake`)
* Matter-specific Zephyr snippets (formerly under :file:`nrf/snippets/matter`, now under :file:`ncs-matter/snippets`)

The add-on manifest (:file:`ncs-matter/west.yml`) imports a fixed |NCS| release together with the matching ``sdk-connectedhomeip`` revision.

Setting up the workspace
************************

To work with Matter samples and applications from the add-on, set up a west workspace that includes the ``ncs-matter`` repository.

Initialize from the add-on manifest
===================================

Complete the following steps to create a new workspace with the `Matter Add-on`_ as the manifest repository:

.. parsed-literal::

   west init -m https://github.com/nrfconnect/ncs-matter --mr |release|
   cd ncs-matter
   west update

> Replace ``|release|`` with the add-on release tag that matches your target |NCS| version (see the add-on release notes).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Replace |release| with the add-on release tag that matches your target |NCS| version (see the add-on release notes).
```

     - :file:`ncs-matter/samples/light_bulb`
   * - :file:`nrf/samples/matter/light_switch`
     - :file:`ncs-matter/samples/light_switch`
   * - :file:`nrf/samples/matter/lock`
     - :file:`ncs-matter/samples/lock`
   * - :file:`nrf/samples/matter/window_covering`
     - :file:`ncs-matter/samples/window_covering`
   * - :file:`nrf/samples/matter/thermostat`
     - :file:`ncs-matter/samples/thermostat`
   * - :file:`nrf/samples/matter/smoke_co_alarm`
     - :file:`ncs-matter/samples/smoke_co_alarm`
   * - :file:`nrf/samples/matter/temperature_sensor`
     - :file:`ncs-matter/samples/temperature_sensor`
   * - :file:`nrf/samples/matter/contact_sensor`
     - :file:`ncs-matter/samples/contact_sensor`
   * - :file:`nrf/samples/matter/closure`
     - :file:`ncs-matter/samples/closure`
   * - :file:`nrf/samples/matter/manufacturer_specific`
     - :file:`ncs-matter/samples/manufacturer_specific`
   * - :file:`nrf/applications/matter_bridge`
     - :file:`ncs-matter/samples/matter_bridge`
   * - :file:`nrf/applications/matter_weather_station`
     - :file:`ncs-matter/samples/matter_weather_station`

Shared sample infrastructure
============================

> The shared code, Kconfig definitions, and CMake logic that was previously located under :file:`nrf/samples/matter/common` is reorganized in the add-on module:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The shared code, Kconfig definitions, and CMake logic that were previously located under :file:`nrf/samples/matter/common` are reorganized in the add-on module:
```

     - ``#include <nrf54lm20_cpuapp_internal_partitions.dtsi>``

Update every board-specific :file:`.overlay` file in your project that references the old ``samples/matter/`` devicetree path.

Snippets
========

Matter snippets move from :file:`nrf/snippets/matter/` to :file:`ncs-matter/snippets/`.
Snippet names are shortened because the add-on registers :file:`ncs-matter/snippets` as a snippet root.

.. list-table:: Matter snippet mapping
   :widths: 35 35 30
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Former snippet path
     - Former snippet name
     - New snippet name
   * - :file:`nrf/snippets/matter/matter-debug/`
     - ``matter-debug``
     - ``debug``
   * - :file:`nrf/snippets/matter/matter-diagnostic-logs/`
     - ``matter-diagnostic-logs``
     - ``diagnostic-logs``

Update build commands and :file:`sample.yaml` definitions that reference the old snippet names.
For example, replace ``template_SNIPPET="matter-diagnostic-logs;matter-debug"`` with ``template_SNIPPET="diagnostic-logs;debug"``.

Build system changes
********************

To align the `Matter Add-on`_ with the |NCS| build system, the CMake, Sysbuild and Kconfig files have been created.

> The Zephyr module configuration points to the new files instead of the alterantives in the |NCS| repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Zephyr module configuration points to the new files instead of the alternatives in the |NCS| repository.
```

Documentation and tooling
***************************

Documentation
=============

Matter sample documentation, getting started guides, and protocol documentation that previously lived under :file:`nrf/doc/nrf/protocols/matter/` and :file:`nrf/doc/nrf/samples/matter.rst` are published from the ``ncs-matter`` add-on documentation set.
After migrating your project, use the add-on documentation as the primary reference for building, configuring, and testing Matter samples.

The |NCS| documentation retains high-level Matter integration information and links to the add-on, similar to how :ref:`zigbee_samples` references the Zigbee add-on repositories.

.. note::
   Documentation cross-references that use the ``|sample path|`` substitution now point to paths under :file:`ncs-matter/samples/` instead of :file:`nrf/samples/matter/`.
   Update any custom documentation or internal wikis that hard-code the old paths.

Validation scripts
==================

If you use the Matter sample validation tooling locally, switch to the add-on copy under :file:`ncs-matter/scripts/matter_sample_checker/`.

> The checker configuration expects add-on directory layout (for example, partition includes without the ``samples/matter/`` prefix and snippet paths under :file:`ncs-matter/snippets/`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The checker configuration expects add-on directory layout (for example, a partition includes without the ``samples/matter/`` prefix and snippet paths under :file:`ncs-matter/snippets/`).
```

*******************

Use this checklist when migrating a custom Matter application:

1. Set up a west workspace that includes the ``ncs-matter`` add-on at a release matching your target |NCS| version.
2. Move or copy your application sources to a path under your workspace (or use an add-on sample as the new base).
3. Update :file:`CMakeLists.txt`:

   * Include :file:`ncs-matter/cmake/sample.cmake` instead of the former ``samples/matter/common/cmake/*`` files.
   * Replace ``ZEPHYR_NRF_MODULE_DIR`` Matter paths with ``ZEPHYR_NCS_MATTER_MODULE_DIR``.
4. Update :file:`Kconfig` files: remove the ``samples/matter/common/src/Kconfig`` source line.
5. Rename all ``CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_*`` symbols to ``CONFIG_MATTER_*`` in configuration files.
6. Update devicetree board overlays: replace ``#include <samples/matter/...>`` with ``#include <...>`` using the filenames from :file:`ncs-matter/dts/`.
7. Update snippet names in build commands (``matter-debug`` → ``debug``, ``matter-diagnostic-logs`` → ``diagnostic-logs``).
8. Update ``west build`` paths to point to the new sample location.
9. Copy or merge :file:`sysbuild_internal.conf` defaults from the matching add-on sample if needed.

> 10. Rebuild from a pristine build directory and verify commissioning, DFU, and factory data workflows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Set up a west workspace that includes the ``ncs-matter`` add-on at a release matching your target |NCS| version.
#. Move or copy your application sources to a path under your workspace (or use an add-on sample as the new base).
#. Update :file:`CMakeLists.txt`:

   * Include :file:`ncs-matter/cmake/sample.cmake` instead of the former ``samples/matter/common/cmake/*`` files.
   * Replace ``ZEPHYR_NRF_MODULE_DIR`` Matter paths with ``ZEPHYR_NCS_MATTER_MODULE_DIR``.
#. Update :file:`Kconfig` files: remove the ``samples/matter/common/src/Kconfig`` source line.
#. Rename all ``CONFIG_NCS_SAMPLE_MATTER_*`` symbols to ``CONFIG_MATTER_*`` in configuration files.
#. Update devicetree board overlays: replace ``#include <samples/matter/...>`` with ``#include <...>`` using the filenames from :file:`ncs-matter/dts/`.
#. Update snippet names in build commands (``matter-debug`` → ``debug``, ``matter-diagnostic-logs`` → ``diagnostic-logs``).
#. Update ``west build`` paths to point to the new sample location.
#. Copy or merge :file:`sysbuild_internal.conf` defaults from the matching add-on sample if needed.
#. Rebuild from a pristine build directory and verify commissioning, DFU, and factory data workflows.
```
